Welcome back and thank you for your questions
on our last piston video. Here are a few more
piston FAQ's that you sent in. A lot of
your questions have revolved compression ratio
and a pistons role within compression ratio.
So first we really need to define what compression
ratio is. Compression ratio is the measurement
of engine cylinder volume; it's basically
a comparison of the engine cylinders volume
with the piston at bottom dead center with
its volume at the piston and top dead center.
If an engine cylinder had a volume of 100
cubic inches with the piston at bottom dead
center and a 10 cubic inch with the piston
at top dead center, the compression ratio
would be ten to one. So what factors play
a role in compression ratio well there are
a lot of factors there is engine bore size,
stroke, piston head volume even head gasket
thickness. Summit Racing has taken a lot of
the guess work out of calculating compression
ratio by putting a compression ratio calculator
on our website under the expert advice tab.
So how do pistons fit in with the compression
ratio calculation well they are a huge part
of the puzzle specifically the compress height
which is measured as the area from the center
of the wrist pin hole to the piston deck and
the piston head volume which the area over
the deck and conclude the dish or the dome
of this piston. These two areas make up the
physical size of the piston and determine
how much volume of air in the piston will
move. Another question we hear quite a lot
is what is piston to valve clearance, well
just like it sounds piston to valve clearance
is the area between the valves and your piston
when the piston is at top dead center. You
don't want these two components to ever
touch the valves or the piston or else you
are going to have yourself a really bad day
so you're going to want to take the time
to check proper clearance's between the
valves and the pistons by claying the valve
pockets on the pistons now the amount of minimum
clearance varies by manufacturer but a lot
of places such as Wiseco recommend eight 100th
of in an inch on the intake valve and one
10th of an inch on the exhaust valve. Another
measurement you need to know is piston to
wall clearance. What is piston to wall clearance
well simply that is the area between the piston
and the cylinder wall? There needs to be a
minimal amount of clearance between the two
to prevent the piston from bonding up in the
cylinder once is expands at full operating
temperatures. Now minimum piston to wall clearance
is recommended by manufacturers varies by
the manufacturer depending on piston material
used. Most of the time the minimum piston
to wall clearance recommended by the manufacturer
is geared toward naturally aspirated street
engines now if you have a higher horsepower
engine or a forced induction engine you are
going to want to air on the side of caution
and use the maximum piston to wall clearance
recommended by your manufacturer. If you have
more questions related to pistons or any other
high performance topic please share your questions
in the comment section below.